# Reading: Notes on Coordination Theory

_by Lesandro Ponciano / April 25, 2012 at 02:10PM_
 
Coordination is managing dependencies between activities or actors. How do we know that a set of activities is coordinated? _ “We notice coordination most clearly when it is lacking”_, Malone (1994). We perceive clearly the lacking of coordination when players of a soccer team cannot work as a team and reach the goal. 
 
Coordination makes sense only in situations where there is some interdependency among activities or actors, like among players of a soccer team. In essence, coordination is very important in collaborative work, such as: when people make a product together;  when they make a decision together; when a parallel computer executes several interrelated tasks; and even when both people and computers work together to solve a problem. In this apparently distinct context, the coordination theory sets in. 
 
Coordination theory is _“a body of principles about how the activities or separate actors can be coordinated”_, Malone (1999). An important factor in this theory is that it attempts to organize in a well-defined intellectual framework several problems that are recurrent and that have been addressed separately in different fields, such as computer science, psychology, neuroscience, and management science. This framework puts in perspective similarities among different fields and provides a better understanding of how a field can take advantage of solutions developed in another. This is possible because this kind of solution is both ubiquitous and variable. It is ubiquitous in the sense that a solution can be used in several different processes, and it is variable in the sense that there are many different solutions that can be used to manage a particular dependency.
 
A feature found in coordination theory is that of characterizing different kinds of dependencies and identifying a coordination process that can be used to manage them. An example of dependency among activities is _“sharing”_.  In this kind of dependency, activities (e.g.: software, people) use the same shared resource (e.g., a processor or a printer). A coordination process to manage this kind of dependency may be, for example, defining a priority order in which each activity can access the shared resource, such as First-come First Served (FCFS), where the resource is first allocated to the first activity requesting it; and Shortest-Job-First (SJF), where the resource will be allocated first to the activity that will spend less time using it.  Besides _“sharing”_, two other kinds of dependencies _“flow”_ and _“fit”_ are highlighted.
 
A flow dependency arises when an activity produces a resource that is used by another activity, i.e., there is a producer-consumer interdependency between activities.  On the other hand, a fit dependency arises when a final resource is produced by the collective work of several activities. Each activity produces a portion of the resource and, by joining all portions, all activities collectively produce the entire resource.  The set of dependencies consisting of “sharing”, “fit”, and “flow” is very generalizable for several classes of problems. This gives rise to the hypothesis that all other dependencies concerning that set of dependencies can be analyzed as specializations (i.e., specific types) or combinations.
 
Some references on coordination theory on which this text is based:
* Thomas W. Malone.  [What is coordination theory and How can it help design cooperative work systems?](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=99367) Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 1990;
* Thomas W. Malone and Kevin Crowston. [The Interdisciplinary Study of Coordination.](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=174668) ACM Computing Surveys. 1994;
* Tomas W. Malone et al. [Tools for Inventing Organizations: Toward a Handbook of Organizational Processes.](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=263061&tag=1) Management Science. 1999.

