# Thoughts: Computational thinking for non-computer science students

_by Lesandro Ponciano/ April 11, 2012 at 01:25PM_

In the last decades, computer scientists have developed several approaches (or mental tools) to deal with complex problems. These approaches include problem decomposition and problem abstraction. For example, by using decomposition, a complex problem may be divided into several smaller parts, and, then each part of it can be solved separately, sequentially and/or recursively. In other cases, to make a problem tractable, each part of it is thought of as an abstraction and/or metaphor of real objects, such as a list, a tree or a stack of anything. The ability to use this “set of mental tools” is normally understood as [“computational thinking”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_thinking).
 
Computational thinking is very important to design and program a computer. However, some computer scientists believe that computational thinking is important not only for topics related to computers but in all topics related to problem-solving. In this way, they understand that computational thinking is essential not only to computer science students but also to everyone. Thus, computational thinking is a fundamental skill, and it must receive the same importance given to other skills such as reading, writing, and doing arithmetic.
 
I have read recently two texts about this subject: [Computational Thinking](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wing/publications/Wing06.pdf) a viewpoint paper by Jannette M. Wing published at Communications of the ACM (March 2006), and ["Computer Science for the Rest of Us"](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/01/business/computer-science-for-non-majors-takes-many-forms.html), an article by Randall Stross, which appeared in The New York Times Business Day (March 31, 2012). The first text explains what computational thinking is, and it defends the thesis that computational thinking is an important skill also to non-computer science students. The second text presents some cases of American universities in which computational thinking is studied by non-computer science students.
 
I think that computational thinking is a very important skill in problem understanding, problem modelling, and problem-solving. I agree with the idea that computer programming is not the only application of computational thinking. Perhaps, it may be the best way for students to develop this skill.  For some students, studying computational thinking will be as hard as studying mathematics, given that it is based on mathematical fundamentals. The study of computational thinking may become more exciting when dealing with more advanced topics such as the ones inspired by several other fields like biology (Genetic Algorithms) and neuroscience (Neural Networks).

