# Thoughts: Bringing together crowds of people and computers in order to process complex tasks

_by Lesandro Ponciano / April 18, 2012 at 03:36PM_
 
The need of solving complex problems guided humans to project computers. In the beginning, computers were very big and expensive, and they were projected to process specific tasks. In time, their prices and sizes decreased, whereas their processing power increased.  Furthermore, it became possible to project general-purpose computers, i.e., computers able to process several kinds of software and tasks. The software makes computers less scary for people and more useful for daily tasks. Joined in a network, computers make up a platform that provides people with an array of ways to communicate, share content and gain knowledge from one another. Thus, computers became accessible and precious to most people. Perhaps, one may say that computers are now part of the human body, enhancing human senses and making humans more efficient.
 
However, there are several tasks which computers cannot process efficiently yet.  For example, computers are not able to perform tasks associated with creativity, intuition, and understanding of human perception. For solving such tasks, the human brain is even more efficient and more accurate than silicon computers. On the other hand, computers are more efficient and accurate to perform a great deal of math calculus on larger datasets. Thus, there is a set of tasks that neither computers nor humans can efficiently perform. Bringing together crowds of people and computers in order to process such tasks is the main purpose of the new computing paradigm called Human Computation.
 
Human computation brings several implications to society. In the study, [“Programming the global brain”](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2160718.2160731), which appeared in the Communications of ACM (May 2012), Bernstein et. al. highlighted that these “new ways of combining networked humans and computers are already important and likely to become truly transformative in domains from education and industry to government and the arts”.  They discussed several implications and challenges of human computation. In the same way, the article [“Gaining Wisdom from Crowds”](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2093548.2093553), published in the Communications of ACM (March 2012) by Neil Savage, presented cases where common people playing online games (which is a kind of computation) helped scientists to solve molecular biology problems.
 
Today, one kind of human computation which is most visible is the human computation marketplace, such as MTurk.com, innocentive.com, odesk.com and TopCoder.com. In these kinds of the marketplace, people can complement their earnings by executing Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs). The requesters -- those that submit tasks to be executed in a marketplace -- may access a variety of solutions. Other people can also benefit from these marketplaces. For example, computer scientists may analyze the different ways people follow to solve complex tasks, and, then, they can use this information to construct better algorithms to solve these tasks efficiently. Furthermore, scientists from different fields may use these kinds of systems to study human behaviour.
 
Human computation is a new and very interesting research field in computer science. Good articles on this subject may be found in the proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), the ACM Symposium on User Interface, Software and Technology (UIST), among other conferences on cooperative systems and Human-computer Interaction.

